We've heard gravitational waves are
ripples in spaceime. It's very tempting
to look out into space and think of
empty space. Space isn't empty. Space
doesn't do nothing. It can curve. It can
ripple. It can tear. And so that's
really the wavy part of spaceime. I mean
the idea is when we have objects that
are massive things like neutron stars
and black holes so dense objects in the
universe objects where that have so much
gravity packed into a small volume that
really the space around those objects is
very bent have those objects try to
[Laughter]
[Music]
ompily your personal
astrophysicist. I got with me Harrison
Greenbound. Harrison, how you doing,
man? I'm good. Thanks for having me
back. I'm so excited. I know this is not
your first rodeo with us. All right. You
know what we're going to talk about
today?
[Laughter]
Space. Gravity and waves, but not
gravitational waves. I will totally hook
you up on that. All right. Great. So,
Harrison, you're a comedian, and I just
learned you have an off Broadway show.
Yeah, it's called Harrison Greenbound,
coincidentally. Uh, I wonder why.
Exactly. So, Harrison Greenbound. What
just happened? What just happened? It's
on stage and it's a comedy and magic
show. I've been working on it for uh I
forgot you do magic. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
Oh my gosh, that is so geeky. Oh, yeah.
I went to Magic Camp and Space Camp. So,
I've really So, you had no dates going
through your entire career of school.
Yeah, my parents wanted breaks for me
one week at a time.
So, our guest today has a different
expertise from you. Really? We have
Nurgis Mavala. Did I say that correctly?
Yes. Excellent. And this is your second
time on Star Talk. It is. You were last
on Star Talk 9 years ago. I'm hardly
nine years old. Don't don't you at one
of our live performances uh Star Talk
Live in Count Basy Theater in New
Jersey. We occasionally take the show on
the road but regionally. Yeah. And uh
that was back when our first results
from uh gravitational waves came across.
Yeah. Shortly after the first
discoveries. Yeah. Very very cool. Well,
you are a quantum astrophysicist. That
is the baddest assest thing you could
ever put on a business card. I feel like
quantum is very small and astrophysics
is very big. That's it's another reason
why
you're a professor at MIT. Which
department did they put you in? Physics.
Physics department. That makes sense,
doesn't it? It would be weird if she was
just teaching English.
And I'm sorry to learn you're also dean
of the school of science. Sorry to hear
that. Yes. Yeah. Can you get people in
trouble? I can, but mostly mostly I get
myself in trouble.
Do you cheat on your own test?
I have the answer key. It's not fair.
So, a dean of the MIT School of Science,
I say I'm sorry to hear that because
that takes time away from like your
studies, doesn't it? But they pay you
more. They do. Yeah, they do. And the
other thing that's that comes with being
dean is you actually get a some
administrative help. And as a result, I
actually have a little bit more time to
be in the lab than when when I'm just
being professor and running around doing
too many things, trying to get things
done. Now you got pe you got peeps. Now
I got I got really really talented
peeps. Okay. All right. That's how that
should work. Uh you are on the LIGO
team. Let's test Harrison. Harrison,
what is an acronym? What does LIGO stand
for? Uh Lord, I got options.
Does that that works
Nurgus? I think that should be the new
meaning of the of the acronym LIGO. You
know, there's a lot of changes coming to
NSF proposals. That could be one of
them. Lord, I got options. Uh laser
interferometer gravitational wave
observatory. Did I get that correct? You
did. You did. Very good. And you're on
the team that discovered these. So, I
understand they took a bunch of people
to Stockholm for the Nobel Prize. Were
you on on that plane? Yes. Excellent.
You got all dressed up and everything. I
kind of Yeah. Yeah. No, that's not my
thing. Kind of. What What What outfit
would you have for some other occasion
if not for the Nobel Prize? You know,
I'm not a dress up type. And so, and and
and then and I'm not a girly type. So, I
had to also decide, am I going to wear
like girly clothes or tux? Oh, you fell
into a a a habeddashural gap. Yes. A
satoral dilemma.
Okay.
Interesting there. So, what did you end
up doing? Just shorts.
I feel like that's Sweden was cool with
that, you know.
No. So, I'm I'm delighted that you got
to so see that. By the way, we just had
on Star Talk. I hung out with Kip
Thorne, the man himself, and we visit
him in his home and we gave had a whole
interview. It was largely about uh, you
know, he was one of the executive
producers on the film Interstellar. Wow.
And it just had its 10th anniversary,
and it was a re-release just in
celebration of that fact because it had
so many people talking about gravity
physics and relativity and and all the
rest of that. So, anything out there
that sort of ratchets up people's
fluency in physics, I'm all for it. Even
if they didn't understand what the hell
they were looking at, right? I was like,
Matthew McConna, I think he's aging. I'm
not sure. There's a thing with the
daughter. Yeah, the daughter and the
thing. Yeah. So, that we we covered
that. But let's get back to
gravitational waves. You reminded me,
I'd forgotten that when we were on
stage, we actually did a gravitational
wave together. The gravitational wave
dance was Yes. Yeah. I I I don't I don't
know if we have footage of that, but I
hope not.
Me, too. I'm trying to picture it.
So, Nius, remind everybody. We've heard
the term gravitational waves are ripples
in spaceime. That's surely accurate, but
I don't know that it helps. So, how can
you dig into that and unpack what's
going on? Yeah. So I think one of the
ways we we can think about that is it's
very tempting to look out into space and
think of empty space as a number of
things that are just aren't true. Space
isn't empty. Space doesn't do nothing.
It actually has many many dynamical
properties. Things that like it can
curve, it can ripple, it can tear. And
so that's really the wavy part of
spaceime. And the idea is is that when
we have objects that are massive, so
they should have gravity, and if they
just When you say massive, you don't
mean a brick or a stone. You're talking
about black holes. Well, you know,
bricks and stones would do the same
thing, except it would be just a much
much smaller effect and harder to
measure. A way harder. So, our threshold
is for what? I mean our measurement
threshold today our measurement
thresholds today are not even ordinary
stars like our own sun couldn't measure
that. No. So if we're looking for waves
from from these kinds of objects are
more things like neutron stars and black
holes. So dense objects in the universe
where gravity is is saying something.
Yeah. So objects where that have so much
gravity packed into a small volume that
really the space around those objects is
very bent. Okay. Have those objects try
to empic.
Oh. Oh.
How did you How do we end up doing doing
a commercial for a pharmaceutical
company and we're not getting paid for?
We're helping the black holes slim down
a little bit. They're very dense.
They're causing waves and gravity.
That's We don't want them to slim down
for their work. But actually, isn't
Hawking radiation a kind of oympic for
black holes? Yeah. They It'll help them
evaporate. Yeah. So, so we got a little
mechanism. So, tell everybody about
Hawking radiation. So, Hawking radiation
it comes about from the quantum
mechanical properties of of black holes.
So, the idea is that in quantum
mechanics we have a phenomenon where
particles and antiparticles can uh can
be formed out of photons and then they
can crash together and become photons
again. And Hawking radiation it's energy
to matter matter back to energy. E= MC
would prescribe how much of that is
happening right in any moment. Okay.
Right. And Hawking on one side M on the
other side. So we good. And then C is
speed of light. Speed of light squared.
Okay. And so this is a a phenomenon by
which as you create these particles uh
some of that energy can get radiated
away. Where does that energy come from?
come from? It comes from the properties
of the gravitational properties of the
black hole. What happens? You're
stealing gravity matter out of the black
hole and thereby taking away some of his
gravity. Yes. Okay. And and and it just
does that. And so so it's a very slow
version of OMIC for black holes. Okay.
That's what started this. I want to
finish it there. Right. Okay. Yeah. All
right. So, Nurgus, can I take you back
to when I was 14? All right. I came to
the Hayden Planetarium. Here's my office
here. Uh, I became director of the
planetarium. I came here as a not at 14.
No, no, no, no.
No, ultimately I became director. So,
uh, I came here and I beyond the space
show that I watched at the time, they
would have programs at night, which we
still do, and with speakers would come
in and give lectures on modern
astrophysics. So, I would come in for
that and one of them was on black holes.
That's when I first learned that gravity
moves at the speed of light. Okay. You
knew that when you were 14. I didn't
learn that till I was much older. That's
when I learned it. That's when I learned
it. 15.
And then I thought about it and I said,
"If gravity travels at the speed of
light, then how does gravity get out of
a black hole?"
And the answer was a little fishy to
me. They said, "Well, there's a
gravitational field that's always there,
and it's a change in the gravitational
field that moves at the speed of light."
And I don't know if that's accurate, but
that's what the dude told me. And
otherwise he couldn't get gravity out of
a black hole where the black hole
doesn't let anything get out even the
speed of light. And that the gravity
moves at the speed of light. How's the
gravity going to get out of a black
hole? I just don't think of it that way.
I I think about gravity as the geometry
of of spaceime and the black hole is
part of that geometry and the things
that we can know about and this is true
for light as well are only things that
are outside the horizon of the black
hole. So what I've always been taught
and I think I learned this maybe even
from Gif Thorne uh was that you it's not
meaningful to think about what happens
inside the horizon cuz we don't even
know if our laws of physics would hold
there or not. And so when I think about
gravity traveling at the speed of light,
what's actually traveling at the speed
of light is a gravitational wave. And
it's only really meaningful outside of
the horizon. She dodged that one. Yeah,
we can't know what's in there, so who
cares? She totally dodged that. No, no,
that's good. That's good. That's that's
an important distinction that physics
had to mature into as a field to realize
there are things that are beyond your
knowledge and therefore there's nothing
you can say about it right at all. Uh
for now, you know that who knows what
which what other forces we might
discover that would describe something
inside that horizon. Okay. But right now
that's not not happening. Okay. So, but
a change in gravity would then be a
ripple. A change in that sort of thing
that I'm feeling out there. And and we
can just watch that at the speed of
light because we say if we pluck the sun
from the center of the of our solar
system, you wouldn't know about it for 8
minutes and 20 seconds. You would still
orbit. We'd still feel the heat. We'd
still feel the gravity. Everything would
be normal. And 8 minutes 20 seconds
later we fly off at a tangent in the
dark and freeze in interstellar space.
Have a nice
day. How this going to happen? Those
eight minutes before are amazing.
Did Einstein I don't know that I've seen
the paper that did this. Did he predict
gravitational waves? Yeah. So Einstein
when he was developing the theory of
general relativity and this was the
theory of gravity. So the the thing that
so we all learn in school Newton's
version of gravity and Newton's law has
been it's easy to understand it's
intuitive. It says you have two objects
that have mass and they're going to feel
a force of attraction between them and
it was quite quantitative. He said the
force of attraction will be proportional
to their masses and inversely
proportional to the square of the
distance separating them. It's very
clean. That's a clean operation. And you
know we teach it in in very early uh
sort of first encounters with physics
and it was quite successful. It told us
about how orbits would work u and and it
also had pretty early on places where it
didn't work perfectly. Now what Einstein
when he was formulating thinking about
gravity he kind of turned it on its head
and he said well look gravity is not
really a force. Gravity is the geometry
of spacetime. Big words. But he had a
series of papers, two or three I uh from
1915 to
19818 in which he sort of formulated
this theory of of general relativity. He
wrote down what what are now known as
Einstein's equations. They look not that
much worse than say Newton's law except
they're quite beastly. They're very
difficult to solve. But part of that
work was that he did ask the question,
what happens if whatever object you're
thinking of isn't just sitting still in
space? What happens if it's moving and
not just moving in a const at constant
velocity? What happens if it's
accelerating? And then out of his
equations popped this wavelike object
which he called gravitational waves. at
the other. You know, I want stuff like
that to pop out of my equation.
Do you have equations where stuff pops
out? No. Look, me neither.
I I'm still stuck on the wave part like
was he gravitational surfing?
They have a lot of analogies to that cuz
if you wanted to try and visualize what
would this look like? One way that you
could is you could think of spacetime as
the surface of a still pond and you drop
a big rock in the middle and there's a
wave that travels a ripple that travels
on the surface. It travels outwards from
where you drop the rock and if you were
a little teeny tiny ant on a surfboard,
you would surf that wave, right? And the
wavelength, so the distance between the
crests, right, would be related to how
big was the rock that you dropped in.
Exactly. Right. Okay. So when you
measure gravitational waves with LIGO or
whatever other tools available to you,
you try to measure the wavelength of
that so that you can infer what created
that wave because you don't otherwise
you didn't see the thing happen. No.
Exactly. Right. So we measure a number
of things. We measure the wavelength
which is the spacing between between the
peaks uh in the successive peaks. We
also measure the amplitude which is how
big what was the height of the wave. And
those both of those things are changing
with time depending on what the the
source is. So by measuring sort of the
shape of the wave as you go into it and
as you come out of it as as it passes by
you as it washes over the earth.
Exactly. And as you do that you can tell
many you can infer some of the
properties of the system that emitted
that wave. Sort of like if you just saw
the ripple at the edge of the pond and
you you have to kind of measure the the
frequency of the wave, you have to
measure the amplitude of the wave. You
have to know something about the density
or the viscosity of the water that of
the pond and from the medium it would
come through differently, right? And and
once you have put those things together
without ever seeing the rock fall in the
center of the pond, you can say
something about the rock. And that's
kind of what we're trying to do. So
that's very impressive because you can
you get this measurement and then out in
the research papers these are two black
holes of 30 m times the mass of the sun
colliding a billion light years away. I
mean that's badass to make that kind of
statement. It is I think that the
properties of the black holes are almost
I can't think of too many things that
are more badass than that. I have to
tell you why. I mean, so you know, one
one of the the first gravitational waves
that we measured with LIGO were from
these 30 solar mass black holes. And you
know what these monsters were doing at
the time that they collided? They were
moving at half the speed of light. Whoa.
Okay. I
just You are speechless. I I'm trying to
picture I don't know if I if you I can
actually picture what that I'm picturing
a Godzilla movie where it's like a black
hole with like little arms and legs.
And they're both fighting each other,
but instead of the city, it's space.
That's where my brain is going. And
instead of, you know, moving at sort of
human or an, you know, Godzilla speeds,
they are moving at the speed of light.
You know, the amount of energy it takes
to accelerate a little electron in our
sort of, you know, experiments to the
speed of light. And to think we do it
with something that's 30 times the mass
of our sun. So there's no greater
particle accelerator than the universe
itself. Indeed.
Is it is there a is it making a sound
when it happens? No. And the reason is
that but wait a minute. You guys put a
soundtrack to that wave. That's
different than whether it made the
sound. Well, then get then get us out of
that little that media ploy because I
always have to undo things that the
media does or give context for it
because people say, "Well, I if space is
is a vacuum and because they knew that
sound doesn't hear you scream." Exactly.
That's a legit call, right, for the
movie alien. Alien. So, did you endorse
this attachment of sound to it? How did
you as an educator and as a physicist,
where were you on that? Yeah. So you
know I I think of it as there are many
many phenomena as scientists or as
humans and observers that we can't
directly observe. Let's take light. So
we love to look at pictures of even
astronomical objects where they're
emitting X-rays. We can't see X-rays. So
we color it blue. We can see blue and
then the object looks blue and we
imagine that's an X-ray. And so when I
think about sound or the sound of these,
you know, waves, it's an encoding. It's
a way of of mapping it onto senses that
we do have. Okay. Right. So that's how,
you know, cuz otherwise that's fair
enough. You know, so I mean, think about
the way that we visualize a cell. We
can't just look at at a blob of stuff
and say that, you know, that's the cell.
We've used microscopes. We've used ways
of observing and then we put together a
picture. We've enhanced our feeble
senses. Exactly. To gain access to the
universe that would otherwise lay
forever invisible in plain sight. But
it's dangerous cuz if you pick the wrong
sound, then nobody cares. Like if you
make a video of two black holes
colliding and it
goes, you got to pick the right sound.
Something out of a Tom and Jerry.
Exactly.
Augaing. Doesn't work. So with LIGO,
alls well that ends well. But it didn't
begin smoothly. I remember there were
physicists called to Congress to defend
the budget outlay to the National
Science Foundation that was going to
take huge chunks of money to pay for
your laser toy. How did you convince
them you weren't building a Death Star?
Yeah. So, so a couple of things. Um it
is certainly part of the history of LIGO
that so what what I know of the history
is that Ray Weiss and Kip Thorne two of
the founders of LIGO. Ray Weiss was an
experimentalist thinking about how you
might measure gravitational waves. They
share the Nobel Prize, right? And they
share the Nobel Prize and Kip Thorne was
thinking about the astrophysics. What
would gravitational waves look like if
two neutron stars or black holes
collided? And they met uh somewhat
accidentally in 1975. Uh the story goes
that they um they had to share a hotel
room because one of their bookings got
messed up and then they were up all
night conjuring up h how one would make
this measurement and that's where the
concept of this 4 kilometer long
detector 2 and a half mile long detector
LIGO was born. What intrigues me here is
at the time, because I remember because
I'm that old, there was someone at the
University of Maryland, Joe Weber, who
was building a gravitational wave
detector. And it was a cylinder of
aluminum with very, highly sensitive
servos, if that's the word, that
monitored the position of this slab of
aluminum. And if a gravitational wave
washed over it, it would jiggle it in
such a way that he would then measure it
by way of these servos. So this method
conjured in the wee hours of the morning
in a hotel room is a completely
different method. Correct. And maybe
there's no way you could have detected
it with a slab a cylindrical slab of
aluminum. I I think now in hindsight we
can say that would have been quite I
mean we haven't done that yet, right?
Okay. So, but so it is true that Joe
Weber at the University of Maryland had
this big slab of metal and it was
instrumented with with sensors that
would see this big slab of metal ringing
just like if you if you hit a wine glass
and it sort of rings a tone. So, it
would ring at when because of the
gravitational wave that went through it.
Now it turned out that that Weber's
claim people so when Weber made the
claim a lot of people started to build
similar instruments and to try to to
reproduce the measurements and they
couldn't and eventually it it people
just didn't believe it. If I remember
correctly he had a paper saying he had a
measurement. He had a me measurement and
I if I recall correctly the claim was we
have a measurement and not only do we
have a measurement but it seems like the
wave is coming from the center of our
galaxy which was sort of seen as a
preferred location for some
gravitationally heavy object like a
black hole but people just couldn't
reproduce it. But what it did do is it
really sparked interest in the topic and
and so a large number of people started
to build these and they not all null
results are bad if they stimulate
interest is is the lesson there. I think
that's right. And even in in Weber's
case though eventually it turned out to
be incorrect claims he invented some
techniques that even to this day we
still we still use. So okay you
mentioned something very important about
science. One researcher's result does
not make the truth. Yes. You need
verification
because anything could they could be
biased. The current could have
fluctuated. Anything could have happened
in one case, but if you have two, three,
four, and if they give the same result,
you got something good. If nobody can
match the result, it's time to move on.
That's right. And in Weber's case, I
think it was even more interesting
because he had two of these bar
detectors. And it was only when people
built third, fourth, fifths, and they
were built with slightly different
technologies and perhaps even with
slightly different
expectations that it was understood that
no one was reproducing what what was. So
now in LEGO, when you made your grand
announcement, two black holes colliding,
why should we believe you? Cuz I Where's
the Is there another LIGO to check what
you did? Yes. Oh, well, there it is. How
many of these lasers are there? Okay.
Yes, there is. Next. We're done there.
Nice.
Uh, no, there was foresight there. Of
course, the the LIGO facility I visited
was in Louisiana outside of New Orleans.
But you would have a whole other one. If
that one LIGO facility makes a
detection, you would presume and expect
another LIGO to make the detection as
well. Correct. Not necessarily in the
same moment, separated by almost
certainly not in the same moment because
there's another LIGO facility in
Washington state east of Seattle. And
you can think about sort of if you think
about a wave that's coming through the
earth, a gravitational wave does that.
If a gravitational wave is emitted by
some distant source, light is actually
quite difficult for astronomers because
uh light coming to us interacts with
everything in between. Gravitational
waves just pass through most things. Oh,
so they are quite useful. You have a
pure expression of what happened at its
source. Yes. But it's a double-edged
sword because by the same, you know,
token, it doesn't interact very strongly
with our detector either. So, it's
really pretty darn careful what you wish
for. Yeah. Right. Right. This
gravitational wave sounds rude. Where?
So the one in It's Hanford, I think. Is
that the one? Yes. Hanford Hanford,
Washington. Washington, which I think
used to be a place where they purified
plutonium. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So are you
giving emotions to the gravitational
wave? You're declaring it's rude. Yeah.
The gravitational wave just walks
through the party, says hi to nobody.
Nobody.
Yes. So you know that that is one of so
if you ask one of one of the things that
we haven't observed with gravitational
waves is gravitational waves from the
very early universe say right after the
big bang and when we think about what we
know about the big bang but just to be
clear you haven't observed them because
you don't have the capacity to do so yet
not because our instrumentation just
isn't sensitive enough. Okay. Yeah. So
if you think about what we know about
the big bang we what we know comes from
light. Now, the light that we see from
the Big Bang, this cosmic microwave
background, actually comes to us from
400,000 years after the Big Bang. Now,
what happened before that, we can't tell
because the universe was so hot and and
dense at the time that the light
couldn't escape. Now, what does that
mean? It's exactly what you were saying,
Harrison. So, the light is like going to
a party with an extrovert and you say,
"Honey, I'm ready to leave." And it'll
be an hour before you leave the party
cuz they're going to stop. They're going
to say hi to people on the way to saying
bye to people. Top off their drink.
Exactly. And they're not coming.
Gravitational waves from the early
universe have been streaming to us. If
we could measure them in in the LIGO
band, they would be streaming to us from
when the universe was 10 the minus 22
seconds old. And the reason is just what
you said. They're like going to the
party with the introvert. you say, you
know, we're ready to leave and you're
lucky if they'll say goodbye to the
host, right? So, this distinguishes our
access to the early universe from what
our normal telescopes can bring to us,
which is this
400,000year barrier really. And the
gravitational waves would just plow
right past that. They don't even care.
They don't they they're moving right
along, right? And so if you want to see
the earliest moments of the universe,
gravitational waves are your friend. If
we want to make them more sensitive, do
we have to have bigger lasers? That's a
piece of it, but there's lots of other
things you got to make better, too. So
that kind of dubtales to to a bone I
have to pick with you people. Do tell
you quantum people. I'm in conversation
with Kip Thorne and I verified because
I'd read this and but he's the man and I
said you have all this apparatus four
meter four kilometer long beam that
reflects and they recombine you look at
a phase shift that and look at a jiggle
and I said how big is that jiggle how
how much did this
apparatus
move by virtue of this wave passing
across and it is the width
of 12th the diameter of a proton
when it's cold when it's nice outside.
No, that's too big. Too
big. Wait. So, so all right. So, so, so
let's just speak more broadly. A
fraction the diameter of a nucleon of an
atom. Okay. A thousand. Okay. So, you
want to make sure nothing else is
responsible for what you're about to
measure. Otherwise, you're measuring the
wrong thing. And when I visited, they
were telling me if somebody's walking
down the street a mile away, those
vibrations can be detected in that
exactly how they described it. But they
they see all vibr so they have to
isolate the experiment from anything
that could be happening from the
outside. Okay. So then you isolate it
and then you put it in a vacuum so that
air particles are not bumping into it.
So now it's there but then it is at a
temperature. It's not at absolute zero.
So at any temperature all everything is
vibrating. And even if you tamp that
down there's always a quantum
uncertainty about the position of a
particle. Heisenberg told us this. Okay.
So you if you want to know exactly what
a particle is doing, there's an
uncertainty to that. So how are you
making measurements that are smaller
than the quantum uncertainty allows? And
I we we had this conversation and Kip
Thorne said, "Well, we did blah blah
blah and we did this and in that way we
cheated the quantum laws." And I say,
"No,
no, then it's not a law if it bends at
your will." So what was he talking
about? Yeah, we do that.
This is like invasion of the body
snatchers. Yes, he's one of
I think freeze like one of us. One of us
we we both can bend the rules of quantum
physics. So, okay, for those of you who
have such powers, please explain to me.
Yeah, it like in as plainest English as
you can. Yeah. So, let me let I I can
try to do that. So what quantum
mechanics tells us is that if you
measure two particular properties of a
particle and in in in one example would
be the energy of let's talk about
photons because it turns out in LIGO at
the moment we're limited by the quantum
mechanics of the light. The quantum
mechanics of the mirror isn't yet a
problem because the mirrors are still
moving more than their quantum
properties would allow. Okay. So let's
let's talk about the light. Um the
quantization of the light says a light
has two properties. Lights made up of
photons. And if I want to make a
measurement of that, I want to know two
things about it. What was the energy of
the photons that I'm measuring? And when
did they arrive on my detector? And you
can't know those two things at the same
time with infinite precision with
perfect Exactly. with perfect knowledge.
But you can know one of those properties
very very well if you allow the other
one to be very unknown that quantum
mechanics allows you to do and that's
the trick we play. So if we are
interested as we are in our measurement
measuring the phase of the light wave
the phase would be because you have two
light beams and you have to see how they
match up. That's right. Because if they
match up perfectly nothing happened to
one relative to the other. Gotcha. But
if if if a wave washes over, then one
jiggles a little differently and you
will the waves don't match up that
you'll see the Okay. So, right. So,
that's exactly right. So say if you're
interested in in measuring the phase
then what you can do is you can create
light with properties where you let the
amplitude or the energy of of of the
wave be very unknown but you've you've
traded off traded that off for precision
in the phase and we have learned how to
make instruments that can do that. Damn.
So they're instruments that increase
uncertainty they in one in one variable.
That's right. And and reduce it in the
other variable. And that's really
important. If you were reducing the the
quantum uncertainty in both variables at
the same time, you would be violating
the laws of physics. But that we are not
doing. Okay. You're just bending the
laws of physics. We not breaking the
laws at all. No, no. It's that a
loophole. I like to say this is a
quantum loophole. Admit it. Well, no.
I Oh, she got angry. You got a custom
attitude on for increasing the
uncertainty.
I I call it manipulating the laws of
quantum physics because we can't violate
them. And loopholes are things that are
just usually things you haven't thought
of. Yeah. Whereas this we've thought of.
We're deliberately doing this. And you
know, so that's the kind of So it's not
a problem if you don't know at all what
the So there's a price to pay. The price
to pay is look if you're interested in
measuring the phase and if by accident
because your measurement apparatus isn't
perfect you start to collect a little
bit of information about the amplitude
it won't work for you anymore because
remember the amplitude is now very very
noisy. Wow. Okay. So so this is what we
do. We reduce the noise in the quantity
we're most interested in measuring. We
stuff it into the quantity we're trying
not to measure. Okay. And then we try to
do that as well as we can. grabbing
quantum physics by the horns. Yes. And
making it bend to your will. You know,
almost we call it squeezing. We squeeze
the light.
Let's get the picture of this now. You
have two beams. Yeah. They're at right
angles, I presume. Yeah. Yes. And the
round trip is is 8 km. Is that right? Or
Okay. And so it takes time for the me
very measured time for the light to do
that. This is a single laser beam of
light that has been split. Correct. It
has been split. And not only does it go
4 kilometers down and come back, there's
an added complication, if you will,
which is that in that 4 kilometer span,
we have a pair of mirrors that are
facing each other. And just like when
you put your own head between two
mirrors and you see multiple images, the
light is bouncing multiple times between
those. It's a way of of increasing the
path length, if you will. All right. So
and so it bounces in our case in LIOS
case about 100 times. Okay. So but then
it has to come back through to recon to
re to recombine. Yes. Okay. So you have
your magic waves that you it goes up and
back 100 times. Then at some point the
light has to come back through and not
reflect back. Correct. And then you
compare the waves of the light from the
two the two arms. Yeah. So that's the
shift. So how much different would one
wave have to be from the other to be the
gravitational wave to be the effect of
the gravitational wave? Yeah. So so the
the way you can think of it is that the
output of our our instrument we're
measuring you think of the light as two
sine waves one from each arm and we
arrange the the distances such that the
two light waves cancel. So the peak of
one sits on the trough of the other and
in the ideal case you would see no light
zero right and then if one arm is
slightly different in in line then they
don't perfect and now some light sort of
trickles out brilliant right exactly I
should get a Nobel Prize for that they
already did
you're tied with Einstein
tied so it's always better to see a
signal where there isn't otherwise a
signal than to measure the difference
between two large signals. Yeah. If you
try to measure a tiny difference in a
big number, it's really hard to measure.
But you start with something that's very
close too. Yes. You start with something
that's very close to zero and now you
get anything. You got something. Wow. So
that's what we do. And how strong is
that extra signal compared with the
amplitude of the waves to begin with? So
what fraction of that amplitude is?
Yeah. Well, that's that's a sort of a
technical detail because you start off
with, you know, 100 watts of laser light
and by the time you That's a powerful
laser. Yeah, that's a very powerful I
believe laser particularly if if it's a
laser that's also, you know, as as
quiet, noisefree as ours. What is my
laser pointer? Your laser pointer is
like a millowatt. Yeah. Yeah. Millatt.
Okay. A really bright one. A few
thousand a few thousand of a watt,
right? Gotcha. And this is 100 watts.
Yeah. So this is 100 watts at the laser.
And by the time the light has bounced
between all the mirrors and so on, at at
any given instant in time, you you could
have, you know, hundreds of kilowatts of
power circulating in the instrument. But
at the time that we detected at the
output, you know, we're trying to go
for, you know, very little light, close
to zero. We're measuring something
around of order 10ish mills of light.
Okay. But relative to the hundreds of
thousands of millows that are moving
around. That's right. The more
interesting question is you can think
about the output of the inerometer is
itself just it has a it's a syosoidal
function. And so the way I like to think
about it is we try to park ourselves at
a trough and then at the bottom and then
we're asking what is the smallest amount
of of of light that you can distinguish
resolve and that is how much of phase or
distance path length you're resolving.
And so that's the number that
corresponds to a path length difference
of 10 the minus 18 m which is the
fraction of the diameter of a proton
that you thousandth diameter of a
proton. Crazy talk. And so so she
slipped in a nice term in there. I want
to like pull that out. She mentioned
intererometer. Okay. that as a
device had to be invented and it was
invented at the turn of the century the
the previous century by m Albert
Michaelelsson and morally what's his
first name I don't remember his first
name the famous Michaelelsson morally
experiment they invented it to measure
the speed of light so the first truly
accurate measurement of the speed of
light was by Michaelson and Mley using
an interpherometer where they had waves
that either line up or they don't and
the amount that they don't line up will
give you information about the speed of
the light that they were measuring. So I
mean it's it's a hugely power. So they
got the Nobel Prize for inventing that
device.
They're just giving these things out.
I think this is the third one we've
heard about today. Just handing them out
like candy. So just I I I'm I'm just
impressed by how all this comes
together. I think it's just a reminder
to us that every discovery we make is
built on everything that came before,
right? Because we we've talked about so
many things that were invented 100 years
ago that were important to the
discoveries we made in 2015. All right.
So take us out with your prediction of
what what discoveries await us to take
the physics we now know into a new place
or what new physics needs to
arrive to take our understanding of the
universe to a new place. Yeah. So I
would say at the moment the kinds of
objects astrophysical objects we've seen
so far have been collisions of pairs of
black holes or pairs of neutron stars or
maybe neutron stars and black holes in
in the same binary system and those were
predicted. We kind of expected them but
even that has given us mysteries like
I'll give you an example. We've seen
black holes that are around 100 solar
masses. We don't know how nature forms
those because if they're formed in the
same way as black holes that are 20 or
30 solar masses are formed. Stars don't
do that. Right. We don't that it that it
means we don't understand how stars are
born. That's
right. Right. Right. I always thought
it's like you pick up an instrument and
you practice a lot how how stars born.
Oh how that works. I think there's been
three films of that.
Yeah. They keep making the films,
right? Stars.
What I'm saying is we've had three films
to learn how a star is. But but let me
just remind you that movie stars are
called stars because we had stars first.
Okay? We we came first, not because
they're filled of gas.
Hot
gas. They're named after objects in the
universe, not vice versa. Just to be
clear. But Neil, I think this is a good
idea for for you. I think you need to
make the ultimate A Star Is Born movie
about real stars. Oh, if we're going to
make the movie again, just make it
right. Yeah, I agree. I'll be the one in
love with the stuff.
Well, thank you for enlightening us here
with uh your insights and your expertise
and your deenship. Oh my gosh.
What I'd like to do is sort of take us
out with a cosmic perspective if I may.
This is the part where I just talk to
camera and you just pretend like you're
paying
attention. Once again, we are exposed to
major modern discoveries in science,
physics in particular, that was
enabled
by creative thinking that preceded it.
uh creative
engineering uh improvements in
computational
speed. These things
happen. Yeah, you can say I got a really
fast computer and you can be praised for
that. But maybe someone can use that for
something that they could not have
solved before. I have a new idea about
how black holes work. Well, let others
know about it because somebody could
have another idea about how to apply
that to a discovery we're not even
thinking about now. And so this
interconnectivity, this
interdependence of cosmic discovery on
these multiple frontiers is how science
works. People ask, are we approaching
the end of science?
Well, if you think everything that will
ever be discovered has been discovered,
then you probably think that. But my
read of the history of this exercise
tells me
that if you think science is about to
end, it's because you're not creative
enough to imagine where else it could
go. And look at all the dangling bits
and pieces of all the scientific
frontiers and how they might one day
come together with a next generation
Einstein to take us into the next
millennium
of cosmic
discovery and that's a cosmic
perspective. So Energis thanks for
coming back to Star Talk. We dovetailed
another uh talk you were giving at NYU
sister institution downtown. Thanks for
fitting us into your day. And again,
it's Maval Vala. Yes, I did that
correct. Thank you. And Harrison, great
to see you again. Same here. Good to
hear about your show. People can find
you. Harrison Greenbound.com at Harrison
Comedy on social media. You got it. Neil
deGrasse Tyson, your personal
astrophysicist. As always, I bid you to
keep looking up.
[Music]